---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome to Phil 1001: Introduction to Philosophy!"
---

Dear class,

I hope you are all enjoying a restful last stretch of summer and have been taking care of yourselves and loved ones—I’m excited to meet you on our first day of class, Wednesday, September 3! 

My name is Ding (my pronouns are they/them and she/her). I work in an area of philosophy that examines, theorizes, and critiques our messy political and social world—unimaginatively called “political and social philosophy.” And I’m particularly interested in both how our social institutions define, administer, and discipline gender from the top down through hidden conceptual frameworks and how, in turn, queer trans women’s gender practices build a liberating alternative from the ground up.

Like most of you, this is my first semester at Barnard, so please especially don’t be afraid to hop by my office hours to say hi! I’d very happily reciprocate with stories and musings from the Southern Arizona borderlands, where I lived for six years teaching and getting my PhD at the University of Arizona.

I feel lucky to get to introduce you to a discipline—a world of ideas, inquiries, tools, methods, histories—so close to my heart. My hope is that you will have fun, be challenged, build community, engage with the world around you, and learn to think critically *for* yourself; I want this to become one of your favorite courses like my first philosophy class was for me!

Now, some logistics:

- For this class, we will use Columbia’s CourseWorks/Canvas system for assignments/grades/password-protected file sharing, and then a separate, hopefully-easier-to-use [course website](https://intro.dingherself.com) for everything else—syllabus, policies, schedule, handouts, et alia.
- I’m teaching two sections of Introduction to Philosophy, one larger and one smaller. The larger/afternoon one (sec. 003, MW 4:10–5:25pm, Diana Center 203) has a teaching assistant, Nick Witchey, who will be the primary point of contact for students enrolled in that section. Students in the smaller/morning section (sec. 002, MW 10:10–11:25am, Milbank Hall 327) should contact me directly, not Nick.
- Please be sure to review our syllabus and reading schedule before class starts. There is a **short reading assigned for our first class**—check out the schedule to find out what it is! There are no required textbooks to buy (though I have recommended a few texts for those interested; see the syllabus); if a reading is not linked directly in the schedule, I will upload it to CourseWorks > Files.
- Unlike other courses in the humanities, we are not going to read as many pages a week; instead, you may find the readings a lot denser than you are used to. So, take the time you need to read the assigned texts carefully and critically in advance of each class, participate in class discussions actively and regularly, and come to office hours to talk through materials that you find interesting or puzzling.

<script language="JavaScript" type="text/javascript">
      var g = "edu";
      var o = "barnard";
      var c = ".";
      var a = "dding";
      var t = " ";
      var s = "@";
      document.write("<p>If you have any questions, please don’t be shy to get in touch! Email is the best way to get hold of me:" + t + "<a href='" + "mail" + "to:" + a + s + o + c + g + "'>" + a + s + o + c + g + "</a>" + ". I try to get back to students within a couple of hours, but it may take me longer in the morning (I’m a night owl) or while I’m on the road. If you don’t hear back from me for more than a day or two, feel free to send me a quick reminder/follow-up.</p>");
</script>
<noscript><p>If you have any questions, please don’t be shy to get in touch! Email is the best way to get hold of me: [you must enable JavaScript in your web browser to view the email address]. I try to get back to my students within a couple of hours, but it may take me longer in the morning (I’m a night owl) or while I’m on the road. If you don’t hear back from me for more than a day or two, feel free to send me a quick reminder/follow-up.</p></noscript>

Once again, welcome! I hope you will enjoy this class, and I’m looking forward to getting to know every one of you over the course of the semester!

All my best,\
Ding