---
layout: post
title: The <em>Junzi</em> I
module: "Portraits of a philosopher"
---

## Who’s the philosopher?

- Morton’s: Critical but constructive visionary.
- The ancient Greek answer: The lover of wisdom.
  - *Philosophía*: “Love of wisdom.”
- The ancient Chinese answer: The gentleman, or *junzi*.

## The idea of a *junzi*

*Junzi* 君子: “Son of a monarch/prince.”

- Resignification (“conceptual engineering,” as contemporary philosophers say): [Hereditarily] nobleman -> [morally] noble man (standardly translated as “gentleman”).
  - Both *jun* 君 and *zi* 子 are gendered characters.
  - Can you be a *junzi* if you are not a man (17.25)?

- One is not born, but rather learns to be, a *junzi*.
  - *Xue* 学 (“learning”): Transformative self-cultivation/moral character development, not acquiring specialized knowledge (e.g., agriculture, 13.4).
  - Pitched in part at rulers: *Tian* 天 (“Heaven,” conceived of as a higher power) confers its *ming* 命 (“mandate,” understood here as a moral right, rather than de facto power, to rule) on the virtuous.
- Two questions I’d like us to focus on today:
  - What’s a *junzi* like?
  - How do you learn to become one? 


## The concept of *ren*

The *junzi* exemplifies the high virtue of *ren* 仁 (“goodness”), which enables him to be in harmony with the *dao* 道 (“way [of Heaven]”).

- *Ren* 仁: Phono-semantic compound that takes the sound of *ren* 人 (“human”) and the meaning of *er* 二 (“two”); famously elusive.
- *Dao* 道: Roadway; ~how things out to be/how we ought to live.

<i>In-class activity: What does Kongzi think</i> ren <i>amounts to? How does one achieve</i> ren<i>?</i>

- Group 1: 1.1, 1.12, 2.17, 4.2, 4.16, 4.22, 5.12, 6.29, 11.22, 11.26, 17.21.
- Group 2: 1.2, 2.11, 3.23, 4.1, 4.17–20, 6.18, 7.30, 8.9, 9.3, 12.19, 14.36.

*Li* 礼 (“rituals”) from the long-gone Zhou period (1046–771 BCE; Kongzi lived between 551 and 479 BCE).

- The Zhou already figured it out; let’s just revive their *li*.
- Not just ceremonial rites but social customs governing proper conduct (e.g., the golden rule).
- *Xiao* 孝 (“filial piety”): Respect for parents in the forms of obedience,   three-year mourning period, etc.
- More know-how than know-that.
- Should be applied in a way that’s sensitive to circumstances, but this is not that flexible (e.g., 9.3, 11.22, 17.21).

Some broader questions: How should we relate to the ancients? How should we relate to Kongzi and his teachings?
