---
layout: post
title: The <em>Junzi</em> II
module: "Portraits of a philosopher"
---

## Today

- Kongzi on rituals
- Lingering question #1: Where are the women?
- Lingering question #2: Is this really what Goodness is?

## Ban Zhao’s development of Confucianism

One of the first women historians we know (c. 45–115 CE), commissioned by the Emperor to complete the work of her brother and father.

Skilled user of double meanings:

- “Traveling East”: Road ~ *Dao*. [Xiaojing]
  - Attempts to resolve the fate vs. self-cultivation tension: “I know that man’s nature and destiny rest with Heaven, / But by effort we can go forward and draw near to [goodness].”
- “The Needle and Thread”: Metaphor for the *yang* (“sun”) and *yin* (“moon”) producing harmony. [Nikita]
  - Note the use of feminine-coded objects.
- *Lessons for Women*: Survival manual for young girls in a Confucian society.
  - Morality or expediency? [Leah, Isabella]
    - Case study: chap. 6, p. 88
  - Husband/wife ~ *yang*/*yin*. [Lilah]
    - The *yang* controls the *yin*; the *yin* serves the *yang*.
    - Argument against domestic violence: Divides the *yang*/*yin*.
    - Argument for educating women: Necessary for the wife to serve the husband.

## Mozi (c. 470–391 BCE)’s critiques of Kongzi

On *ren*/goodness: Against rituals.

- *Analects* 11.26: How would you rule a state?
  - Zilu: “infuse … people with courage and a sense of what is right.”
  - Ran Qiu: “see that the people would have all that they needed.”
  - Zihua: “serve as a minor functionary—properly clad in ceremonial cap and gown—in ceremonies at the ancestral temple, or at diplomatic gatherings.”
  - Zengxi: “In the third month of Spring, once the Spring garments have been completed, I should like to assemble a company of five or six young men and six or seven boys to go bathe in the Yi River and enjoy the breeze upon the Rain Dance Altar, and then return singing to the Master’s house.”
  - Kongzi: “I am with Zengxi!”

- Mozi: Does this benefit or harm the people? [Yasmine, Megan, Zohia]
  - “The business of a benevolent person is to promote what is beneficial to the world and eliminate what is harmful.”
  - Against following traditions: “The so-called ancient style of dress and speech was once new.”
  - Against fatalism: If people believed this, there will be “poverty and disorder”—“a great harm to the people of the world.” [Sofia]


On filial piety: Against partiality/for *jian’ai* 兼爱 (“universal love”). [Lea, Candence, Hana, Anika, Willow, Haley, Sophie]

- In deciding what’s beneficial/harmful, everyone’s well-being counts equally: p. 67.
- [Ding’s Not-Family-Feud Family Feud](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Fz1xiTcqh6s49paEAnm13zAkYtns7JGb5N4F1ERNXr8/edit?usp=sharing)

Against self-cultivation? On ghosts: “If the kings, dukes, great officials, and gentlemen of the world today really seek to promote what is beneficial to the world and eliminate what is harmful, they must inquire carefully into the issue of whether or not ghosts and spirits exist.”

- Why?
- Virtue from within vs. outside? [Sophie, Alexa, Zohia]
- An analogous problem of evil? [Hana]
