---
layout: post
title: The <em>Junzi</em> I
module: "Portraits of a philosopher"
---

## Today

- Wrap up course logistics
- Introduce a metaphilosophical question: Who is a philosopher?
- Introduce classical Chinese philosophy
- Kongzi on Goodness and the gentleman

## What’s the philosopher like?

- Morton’s answer: The critical but constructive visionary.
- The ancient Greek answer: The lover of wisdom.
  - *Philosophía*: ‘Love of wisdom.’
- The ancient Chinese answer: The gentleman, or *junzi*.

## Kongzi

- Confucius [*Kongfuzi* 孔夫子, or *Kongzi* 孔子 for short]: Roughly, ‘Master Kong.’
  - *Fuzi*: A gendered honorific for men, [male] teachers, and husbands.
  - *Kong*: His family name.
- *Analects* [*Lunyu* 论语]: Roughly, ‘collected sayings.’
  - There is a pun of sorts: *Lun* means both ‘discuss’ and ‘select’; *yu* means ‘sayings’ or ‘speeches.’

## The idea of a *junzi*

*Junzi* 君子: “Son of a monarch/prince.”

- Resignification (“conceptual engineering,” as contemporary philosophers say): [Hereditarily] nobleman -> [morally] noble man (standardly translated as “gentleman”).
  - Both *jun* 君 and *zi* 子 are gendered characters.
  - Can you be a *junzi* if you are not a man (17.25)? [Haley]

- One is not born, but rather learns to be, a *junzi*.
  - *Xue* 学 (“learning”): Transformative self-cultivation/moral character development, not acquiring specialized knowledge (e.g., agriculture, 13.4).
  - Pitched in part at rulers: *Tian* 天 (“Heaven,” conceived of as a higher power) confers its *ming* 命 (“mandate,” understood here as a moral right, rather than de facto power, to rule) on the virtuous.

Two questions I’d like us to focus on today:
- What’s a *junzi* like?
- How do you learn to become one? 


## The concept of *ren*

The *junzi* exemplifies the high virtue of *ren* 仁 (“goodness”), which enables him to be in harmony with the *dao* 道 (“way [of Heaven]”).

- *Ren* 仁: Phono-semantic compound that takes the sound of *ren* 人 (“human”) and the meaning of *er* 二 (“two”); famously elusive.
- *Dao* 道: Roadway; ~how things ought to be/how we ought to live.

<i>Group activity: What does Kongzi think</i> ren <i>amounts to? How does one achieve</i> ren<i>?</i> [Megan, Alexna, Kriti, Nirali, Leah]

*Li* 礼 (“rituals”) from the long-gone Zhou period (1046–771 BCE; Kongzi lived between 551 and 479 BCE).

- The Zhou already figured it out; let’s just revive their *li*.
- Not just ceremonial rites but social customs governing proper conduct (e.g., the golden rule).
- *Xiao* 孝 (“filial piety”): Respect for parents in the forms of obedience,   three-year mourning period, etc.
- More know-how than know-that.
- Should be applied in a way that’s sensitive to circumstances, but this is not that flexible (e.g., 9.3, 11.22, 17.21). [Alexna]

Some broader questions: How should we relate to the ancients? How should we relate to Kongzi and his teachings? [Will, Candence]
