---
layout: post
title: Ibn Rushd, <em>Decisive Treatise</em>
module: "Philosophy & religion"
---

## Today

- Talk through Plato & Aristotle
- Time travel! Introduce Ibn Rushed & the Arabic-Latin translation movement

## Between reason and faith

A specific framing: Philosophy represents reason/wisdom/truth, and religion faith.

Ibn Rushd [Averroes] (1126–1198 CE): Not only does philosophy not conflict with *sharīʿah* [Law], but Law requires the study of philosophy. [Anika, Sofia, Xiaojing]

## Reconciling Law and philosophy

Three classes of people, three paths to *taṣdīq* [assent]:

- Those capable of *demonstrative* reasoning (logic): The philosophers. [Candence, Ting]
- Those capable of *dialectical* reasoning.
- Those restricted to *rhetorical* versions of truth: The masses.

What if a conclusion of demonstrative reasoning contradicts the apparent meaning of the Qur’an?

- Ibn Rushd, quoting Aristotle: “truth does not contradict truth.”
  - Truth in philosophy does not conflict with truth in Law.
  - In cases of apparent conflict, philosophy is uncovering an “inner” meaning of the Qur’an, which admits of *allegorical interpretation*.
- Leo Strauss: Exoteric vs. esoteric interpretations of a classical text.
  - Exoteric: Surface meaning, accessible,
  - Esoteric: Hidden meaning, safeguarded.
- Three kinds of passages in the Qur’an (§ 39).
- Those not capable of demonstrative reasoning must be protected from esoteric readings. [Zohia, Hyunsung, Lucy, Sofia]

How does this work? The creation/eternity controversy: Did God create the universe at a particular moment in time, or has the universe always existed (§§ 32ff)?

- The philosophers, following Aristotle: Eternity.
- The theologians: Creation.
- Qur’an: “He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His throne was on the water.”
  - There was water and a throne before the universe was created? No, that’s just a metaphorical/rhetorical description.
  - Ibn Rushd: A created universe could have always existed? Or, an eternal universe could have been brought into existence?
    - Time does not precede creation; the universe and the creator are co-eternal (§ 33).

What is Ibn Rushd really saying? Is this in fact a denial of the tension between philosophy and religion, or affirmation of it in favor of philosophy? [Lucy]
