---
layout: post
title: Simone de Beauvoir, <em>The Second Sex</em>
module: "Meaning in life"
---

“On ne naît pas femme : on le devient.”

- *Literal translation*: “One is not born woman: one becomes it.” 
- *Popular translation*: “Women are made, not born.” 
- *1953 Parshley translation*: “One is not born, but rather becomes a woman.”
- *2011 Borde & Malovany-Chevallier translation*: “One is not born, but rather becomes, woman.”
  {: .mb-5 }

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-color:#ccc;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{background-color:#fff;border-color:#ccc;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;color:#333;font-size:14px;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{background-color:#f0f0f0;border-color:#ccc;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;color:#333;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-baqh{text-align:center;vertical-align:middle}
.tg .tg-buh4{background-color:#f9f9f9;text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-0lax{text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
</style>
  <div class="table-responsive">
  <center>
  <table class="tg mb-5"><thead>
    <tr>
      <th class="tg-0lax"></th>
      <th class="tg-baqh"><span style="font-weight:bold">Sex</span></th>
      <th class="tg-baqh"><span style="font-weight:bold">Gender</span></th>
    </tr></thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-baqh"><span style="font-style:italic">Beauvoir as a Social Construtivist</span></td>
      <td class="tg-0lax">A biological given</td>
      <td class="tg-0lax">The social meaning of that fact</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="tg-baqh"><span style="font-style:italic">Beauvoir as an Existentialist</span></td>
      <td class="tg-0lax">A situation</td>
      <td class="tg-0lax">An individual’s response to that situation</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
  </table>
  </center>
  </div>


So much to say:

- The most popular way of reading Beauvoir as a social constructivist is to make use of the concepts of *socialization* and *gender roles*.
  - To become a woman is to be socialized into a feminine (social) role.
  - Womanhood as a gender role exists prior to the self; the self is inducted into it. 
  - B & M-C: “ ‘Woman’ in English used alone without an article captures woman as an institution, a concept, femininity as determined and defined by society, culture, history.”
- The existentialist slogan: “Existence precedes essence.”
  - Beauvoir’s famous question: What is a woman anyway?
  - The relation between man and human as a particularity misrepresenting a universality: “He is the Subject; he is the Absolute. She is the Other” (p. 6).
  - Womanhood is not a given, but an active, situated process of creation, of becoming; it is an individual’s (sometimes-idiosyncratic) response to the situation they find themselves in (anatomical, relational, social, political etc.).
  - Bonnie Mann explains that “to ‘become’ a woman is not the same as to be made into one, as if one were exclusively a passive object being acted on by external social forces. . . . To ‘become’ is to actively take up one’s social condition in a way that is, at least potentially, spontaneous, creative and free. . . . On this view, Beauvoir could never be understood to have claimed that ‘women are made not born.’ ”
- My complaints:
  - It’s not clear to me that Beauvoir has a two-way sex/gender distinction (compare, e.g., pp. 8–9 with p. 23).
  - It’s also not clear to me that Beauvoir *critically affirms* sex as a biological given: while a biological fact may appear necessary and not up to us, “[i]n truth, nature is no more an immutable given than is historical reality” (think muscles).
  - It’s still not clear to me that Beauvoir thinks of womanhood as a role, rather than a way of life (a “lifestyle”).

Let’s work through two examples:

- Peeing standing up (pp. 286–87)
- The doll (pp. 292–94)

What are some passages that invite a social constructivist reading? Which passages seem to invite an existentialist reading? Does it matter how we read Beauvoir?
